Introduction to artificial neural networks

Introduction rhythms arise from stochastic, nonlinear biological
mechanisms interacting with fluctuating environments.
We need, for this reason, a special kind of mathematics
that has, historically, remained cast away from the
medical context.
The aim of this article is to discuss the possible
advantages derived from the use of artificial neural
networks (ANNs), which are some of the more advanced
artificial intelligence tools today available, as an appro-
priate means of answering the emerging issues and
‘demands’ of medical science, and in particular of
gastroenterology.
We are currently facing a paradox of sorts in which the
amount of progress in the quality of the delivery of
medical care in the everyday routine context of gastro-
intestinal diseases in the ‘real world’ is far from being
proportional to the amount of scientific knowledge built
up in basic science.
Different explanations can be given for this paradox. The
increasing amount of clinical, laboratory, and diagnostic
imaging information data requires more and more specific
tools able to gather and recompose this information, and
these tools are not easily available today as the traditional
statistical reductionistic approach tends to ‘see’ things
individually, to simplify, and to look at one single element
at a time.
The increasing complexity of clinical data requires the
use of mathematical models that are able to capture
the key properties of the entire ensemble, including the
linkages and hubs. The advancement of knowledge and
the progress of understanding the nature of bodily
rhythms and processes have shown that complexity and
nonlinearity are ubiquitous in living organisms. These
European Journal of Gastroenterology & Hepatology 2007, 19:1046–1054
Keywords: artificial neural networks, diagnosis, evolutionary algorithms,
nonlinearity, prognosis
a
Bracco Spa Medical Department, Milan, Italy and b Semeion Research Centre
for Science and Communication, Trigoria, Rome
Correspondence to Enzo Grossi, Medical Department, Bracco SpA,
Via E. Folli 50 20136 Milano
E-mail: enzo.grossi@bracco.com
Received 29 August 2007 Accepted 29 August 2007
In simple words, we have a problem of quantity and
quality of medical information, which can be more
appropriately addressed by the use of new computational
tools such as ANNs.
What are artificial neural networks?
ANNs are artificial adaptive systems that are inspired by
the functioning processes of the human brain [1]. They
are systems that are able to modify their internal
structure in relation to a function objective. They are
particularly suited for solving problems of the nonlinear
type, being able to reconstruct the fuzzy rules that govern
the optimal solution for these problems.
The base elements of the ANN are the nodes, also called
processing elements (PE), and the connections. Each
node has its own input, from which it receives commu-
nications from other nodes and/or from the environment
and its own output, from which it communicates with
other nodes or with the environment. Finally, each node
has a function f through which it transforms its own global
input into output (Fig. 1). Each connection is character-
ized by the strength with which pairs of nodes are excited
or inhibited. Positive values indicate excitatory connec-
tions, the negative ones inhibitory connections [2,3]. The
connections between the nodes can modify themselves
c 2007 Wolters Kluwer Health | Lippincott Williams & Wilkins
0954-691X #
Copyright © Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.Neural networks Grossi and Buscema 1047
Fig. 1
Fig. 2
Dendrites
Axons
Input (n)
1 1
Input
Neuron
2
3
4 4
5
6 6
7
8 . . . . .
n
Output
= Weight
Hidden
1
2
3
4 4
5
. . . . .
n
Diagram of a single processing element (PE) containing a neuron,
weighted dendrites, and axons to process the input data and calculate
an output.
Output
over time. This dynamic starts a learning process in the
entire ANN [4,5]. The way through which the nodes
modify themselves is called ‘Law of Learning’. The total
dynamic of an ANN is tied to time. In fact, for the ANN
to modify its own connections, the environment has to
necessarily act on the ANN more times [6]. Data are the
environment that acts on the ANN. The learning process
is, therefore, one of the key mechanisms that characterize
the ANN, which are considered adaptive processing
systems. The learning process is one way to adapt the
connections of an ANN to the data structure that make
up the environment and, therefore, a way to ‘understand’
the environment and the relations that characterize it
[7–10].
Neurons can be organized in any topological manner
(e.g. one- or two-dimensional layers, three-dimensional
blocks or more-dimensional structures), depending on
the quality and amount of input data. The most common
ANNs are composed in a so-called feed forward topology
[11,12]. A certain number of PEs is combined to an input
layer, normally depending on the amount of input
variables. The information is forwarded to one or more
hidden layers working within the ANN. The output layer,
as the last element of this structure, provides the result.
The output layer contains only one PE, whether the
result is a binary value or a single number. Figure 2
represents the most popular architecture of neural
networks: back propagation [13,14].
All PEs within the ANN are connected to other PEs in
their neighbourhood. The way these connections are
made might differ between the subtypes of neural
networks [15,16]. Each of these connections has a so-
called weight, which modifies the input or output value.
The value of these connection weights is determined
during the training process. This functionality is the basis
for the ANN’s learning capability. Therefore, it is
important to understand that there are no classification
1
2
3
. . . . .
n
Back propagation neural network architecture.
rules written into the algorithm. The network just learns
to understand and classify input patterns from examples.
Basic neural networks can normally be obtained with
statistical computer software packages. Some companies
offer specialized software to work with different neural
networks (e.g. NeuralWorks Professional by NeuralWare
Inc., Carnegie, Pennsylvania, USA [17] or CLEMEN-
TINE Data Mining tool by Integral Solutions Limited,
UK [18]). These software packages must be flexible and
easy to handle for use in widespread purposes.
Properties of artificial neural networks
ANNs are high in pattern recognition-like abilities, which
are needed for pattern recognition and decision-making
and are robust classifiers with the ability to generalize and
make decisions from large and somewhat fuzzy input
data. ANNs are modeling mechanisms particularly skilled
in solving nonlinear problems. In technical terms, we can
say that a system is not complex when the function
representing it is linear, that is when these two equations
apply:
f ðcxÞ ¼ cf ðxÞ
and
f ðx 1 þ x 2 Þ ¼ f ðx 1 Þ þ f ðx 2 Þ
A complex, nonlinear system violates one or both of these
conditions. Briefly, the more the function y = f(x) is
nonlinear, the more valuable it is to use an ANN to try
and understand the rules, R, which govern the behavior
inside the black box. If we take a Cartesian chart in which
axis x represents the money a person gets, and axis y
measures the degree of happiness that person obtains as a
result, then:
Copyright © Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.1048 European Journal of Gastroenterology & Hepatology 2007, Vol 19 No 12
receive to discover the rules governing them [19,20].
This makes ANNs particularly useful in solving a problem
for which we have the data involved, but do not know
how those data are related to one another.
Fig. 3
y
Artificial neural networks are adaptive and dynamically
discover the fuzzy rules that connect various sets
of data
Happiness
Money
x
Linear relation between money and happiness.
This means that if they receive certain data in one phase,
ANNs focus on certain rules; but if they later receive new
and different data, ANNs will adjust their rules in
accordance, integrating the old data with the new, and
they can do this without any external instruction
[21–24].

