
The continuous updating of data under their management creates a dynamic bank, whose rules are automatically refined by the ANNs as the problem in question
evolves through time. This passage from an early
categorization to a later, finer, and more complex one is
managed by the ANN alone, using the new cases as data
to learn about the new category.
Fig. 4
y
Happiness
Artificial neural networks can generalize,
then predict and recognize
Money
x
Once an ANN has been trained with suitable data to find
the hidden rules governing a certain phenomenon, it is
then able to correctly generalize to data it has never seen
before (new, dirty, incomplete data, etc.).
Nonlinear relation between money and happiness.
When are they used?
According to Fig. 3, the more money a person has, the
happier he is. In this scenario, sampling of experimental
data should offer the possibility of easily infering the
relation and it would be worthless to use an ANN to
analyze such a problem; unfortunately this scenario, like
others in real life, is actually more an exception rather
than a rule.
In real life, the relations are generally more complex, such
as that presented in Fig. 4. In fact, as many of us can
witness, an increase in earning can sometimes produce
fears of losing money or uncertainties over how to invest
this money, and this can reduce the feeling of happiness.
The complex relation described in Fig. 4 does not permit
us to understand, at first glance, from the data gathered
experimentally, the relationship between money and
happiness. In situations such as this, it makes sense to
use an ANN to define precisely the relationship between
money and happiness.
Artificial neural networks reveal the hidden rules
of a problem
ANNs are data processing mechanisms that do not follow
specific rules to process data, but which use the data they
The most typical problem that an ANN can deal with can
be expressed as follows: given N variables, about which it
is easy to gather data, and M variables, which differ from
the first and about which it is difficult and costly to
gather data, assess whether it is possible to predict the
values of the M variables on the basis of the N variables.
When the M variables occur subsequently in time to the
N variables, the problem is described as a prediction
problem; when the M variables depend on some sort of
static and/or dynamic factor, the problem is described as
one of recognition and/or discrimination and/or extraction
of fundamental traits.
To correctly apply an ANN to this type of problem, we
need to run a validation protocol. We must start with a
good sample of cases, in each of which the N variables
(known) and the M variables (to be discovered) are both
known and reliable.
The sample of complete data is needed to:
K
K
train the ANN, and
assess its predictive performance.
Copyright © Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.Neural networks Grossi and Buscema 1049
Fig. 5
Random protocol
Database
Random
Selection
Sample 1b
Sample 2b
... ... ... ...
Sample 5b
Sample 1a
Sample 2a
... ... ... ..
Sample 5a
Training
Testing
ANN 1a
ANN 2a
... ... ..
ANN 5a LogR 1a
LogR 2a
... ... ..
LogR 5a
ANN 1b
ANN 2b
... ... ..
ANN 5b LogR 1b
LogR 2b
... ... ..
LogR 5b
Testing
Training
The 5 # 2 cross-validation protocol.
3. At the end of the training phase, the weight matrix
produced by the ANN is saved and frozen together
with all of the other parameters used for the training
4. With the weight matrix having saved the testing set,
which it has not seen before, is shown to the ANN so
that in each case the ANN can express an evaluation
based on the previously carried out training, this
operation takes place for each input vector and every
result (output vector) is not communicated to the
ANN
5. The ANN is in this way evaluated only in reference to
the generalization ability that it has acquired during
the training phase
6. A new ANN is constructed with identical architecture
to the previous one and the procedure is repeated
from point 1
Where are they used? Artificial neural networks
and problems in need of solution
In theory, the number of types of problem that can be
dealt with using ANNs is limitless, as the methodology is
broadly applicable, and the problems spring up as fast as
the questions that society, for whatever reason, poses. So,
let us remind ourselves of the criteria that must be
satisfied for the adoption of an ANN to be worthwhile:
The problem is a complex one
Other methods have not produced satisfactory results
K An approximate solution to the problem is valuable, not
only a certain or best solution
K An acceptable solution to the problem offers great
savings in human and/or economic terms
K There exists a large case history demonstrating the
‘strange’ behavior to which the problem pertains
K
The validation protocol uses part of the sample to train
the ANN (training set), whereas the remaining cases are
used to assess the predictive capability of the ANN
(testing set or validation set).
In this way we are able to test the reliability of the ANN
in tackling the problem before putting it into operation.
K
Fig. 6
Different types of protocol exist in literature, each
presenting advantages and disadvantages. One of the most
popular employed is the so-called 5 # 2 cross-validation
protocol [25], which produces 10 elaborations for every
sample. It consists in dividing the sample five times in
two different subsamples, containing similar distribution
of participants and controls (Fig. 5).
Description of the standard validation protocol
Data
Expert
systems
Artificial neural
networks
The protocol, from the point of view of a general
procedure, consists of the following steps:
1. Subdividing the database in a random way into two
subsamples: the first named training set and the
second called testing set
2. Choosing a fixed ANN, and/or another model, which is
trained on the training set, in this phase the ANN
learns to associate the input variables with those that
are indicated as targets
Physical
models
Schematic comparison of artificial neural network (ANN) with other
analysis techniques. Compared with other analysis techniques, ANNs
are useful when one has a problem with a lot of available data but no
good theory to explain them.
Copyright © Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.1050 European Journal of Gastroenterology & Hepatology 2007, Vol 19 No 12
Figure 6 summarizes the conditions that best claim for
neural networks analysis.
A special feature of neural networks analysis:
variables selection
ANNs are able to simultaneously handle a very high
number of variables notwithstanding their underlying
nonlinearity. This represents a tremendous advantage in
comparison with classical statistics models in a situation
in which the quantity of available information is
enormously increased and nonlinearity dominates. With
ANNs one is concerned neither about the actual number
of variables nor about their nature. Owing to their
particular mathematic infrastructure, ANNs have no
limits in handling the increasing amounts of variables
that constitute the input vector for the recursive
algorithms.
Discriminant analysis, logistic regression, or other linear
or semilinear techniques typically employ a limited
number of variables in building up their model: those
with a prominent linear correlation with the dependent
variable. In other words, for them a specific criterion
exists, for example a correlation index, which indicates
which of the variables available has to be used to build a
predictive model addressed to the particular problem
under evaluation.
ANNs, being a sort of universal approximation system, are
able to use a wider range of information available, and
also variables with a very poor linear correlation index. For
this reason, the natural approach is to include all of the
variables that, according to clinician experience, might
have an a priori connection with the problem being
studied. When the ANNs are exposed to all these
variables of the data set, they can very easily approximate
all the information available during the training phase.
This is the strength, but unfortunately also the weakness,
of ANNs.

